"Alternative return types" added (Anti-patterns documentation) (#12905)
elixir-lang/elixir: lib/elixir/pages/anti-patterns/design-anti-patterns.md

## Alternative return types

#### Problem

This anti-pattern refers to functions that receive options (for example, *keyword list*) parameters that drastically change their return type. Because options are optional and sometimes set dynamically, if they change the return type it may be hard to understand what the function actually returns.

#### Example

An example of this anti-pattern, as shown below, is when a function has many alternative return types, depending on the options received as a parameter.

```elixir
defmodule AlternativeInteger do
  @spec parse(String.t(), keyword()) :: integer() | {integer(), String.t()} | :error
  def parse(string, options \\ []) when is_list(options) do
    if Keyword.get(options, :discard_rest, false) do
      String.to_integer(string)
    else

>       Integer.parse(string)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      case String.parse(string) do
        {int, rest} -> int
        :error -> :error
      end
```

## Alternative return types

#### Problem

> This anti-pattern refers to functions that receive options (for example, *keyword list*) parameters that drastically change their return type. Because options are optional and sometimes set dynamically, if they change the return type it may be hard to understand what the function actually returns.

Reviewer 2: Let's not mention "options are optional" (that's not true, they only are *sometimes*):

```suggestion
This anti-pattern refers to functions that take options (for example, in the form of a *keyword list*) through parameters that drastically change their return type. This requires developers to know the value of those options at runtime for every call in order to determine what the return type of the function is, making the code harder to understand.
```

#### Example

> An example of this anti-pattern, as shown below, is when a library (for example, `AlternativeInteger`) has a multi-clause function `parse/2` with many alternative return types. Depending on the options received as a parameter, the function will have a different return type.

Reviewer 3: I think like this is easier to read:

```suggestion
An example of this anti-pattern, as shown below, is when a function has a multi-clause function `AlternativeInteger.parse/2` with many alternative return types. Depending on the options received as a parameter, the function will have a different return type.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example of this anti-pattern, as shown below, is when a function has many alternative return types, depending on the options received as a parameter.
```

```elixir
defmodule AlternativeInteger do

>   def parse(string, opts) when is_list(opts) do

Reviewer 2: I think that if we add a spec, we'll help folks visualize the return types of this without having to know (or look up) `String.to_integer/1` and `Integer.parse/2`.

```suggestion
  @spec parse(String.t(), keyword()) :: integer() | {integer(), String.t()} | :error
  def parse(string, opts) when is_list(opts) do
```

Author: I agree!

>   def parse(string, opts) when is_list(opts) do
>     case opts[:discard_rest] do
>       true -> String.to_integer(string)
>       _    -> Integer.parse(string)
>     end

Reviewer 2: Two notes:

  * I think we should go with `options` and not `opts`—there's no real benefit in using the shorter one, so let's be more explicit
  * Let's use `if` instead of `case` as it'd be more idiomatic in this instance

```suggestion
  def parse(string, options \\ []) when is_list(options) do
    if Keyword.get(options, :discard_rest, false) do
      String.to_integer(string)
    else
      Integer.parse(string)
    end
```

>   def parse(string, opts) when is_list(opts) do
>     case opts[:discard_rest] do
>       true -> String.to_integer(string)
>       _    -> Integer.parse(string)
>     end
>   end
> 
>   def parse(string, opts \\ :default) do
>     case opts do
>       :default -> Integer.parse(string)
>     end
>   end

Reviewer 4: I think this could be simplified and would be better to illustrate your point:
```suggestion
  def parse(string, opts \\ []) when is_list(opts) do
    case opts[:discard_rest] do
      true -> String.to_integer(string)
      _    -> Integer.parse(string)
    end
  end
```

> 
>   def parse(string, opts \\ :default) do
>     case opts do
>       :default -> Integer.parse(string)
>     end
>   end

Reviewer 2: I think the `parse/2` function shows this issue by itself. I don't think this clause adds anything, and it shows a sort-of-unconventional use of default options (usually you'd have `opts \\ []` and then `Keyword.get(opts, :discard_rest, false)`).

```suggestion
```

end
```

```elixir

> iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13")
> {13, ""}
> iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13", discard_rest: true)
> 13
> iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13", discard_rest: false)
> {13, ""}

Reviewer 3: I would separate them with new lines .

```suggestion
iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13")
{13, ""}

iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13", discard_rest: true)
13

iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13", discard_rest: false)
{13, ""}
```

```

#### Refactoring

> To refactor this anti-pattern, as shown next, it's better to add in the library a specific function for each return type (for example, `parse_no_rest/1`), no longer delegating this to an options parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To refactor this anti-pattern, as shown next, add a specific function for each return type (for example, `parse_no_rest/1`), no longer delegating this to options passed as arguments.
```

```elixir
defmodule AlternativeInteger do

>   def parse_no_rest(string) do
>     String.to_integer(string)
>   end
> 
>   def parse(string) do
>     Integer.parse(string)
>   end

Reviewer 3: I would sort them alphabetically.

`no_rest` is not clear, I would use the same wording as the option key, to illustrate the point.

I have added `@spec`s  to the functions.

```suggestion
  @spec parse(String.t()) :: {integer(), rest :: String.t()} | :error
  def parse(string) do
    Integer.parse(string)
  end
  
  @spec parse_discard_rest(String.t()) :: integer()
  def parse_discard_rest(string) do
    String.to_integer(string)
  end
```

end
```

```elixir

> iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13")
> {13, ""}
> iex> AlternativeInteger.parse_no_rest("13")
> 13

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13")
{13, ""}

iex> AlternativeInteger.parse_no_rest("13")
13
```

## Alternative return types

#### Problem

This anti-pattern refers to functions that receive options (for example, *keyword list*) parameters that drastically change their return type. Because options are optional and sometimes set dynamically, if they change the return type it may be hard to understand what the function actually returns.

#### Example

An example of this anti-pattern, as shown below, is when a function has many alternative return types, depending on the options received as a parameter.

```elixir
defmodule AlternativeInteger do

>   def parse(string, options \\ []) when is_list(options) do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  @spec parse(String.t(), keyword()) :: integer() | {integer(), String.t()} | :error
  def parse(string, options \\ []) when is_list(options) do
```

  def parse(string, options \\ []) when is_list(options) do
    if Keyword.get(options, :discard_rest, false) do

>       String.to_integer(string)
>     else
>       case String.parse(string) do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Integer.parse(string)
    else
      case Integer.parse(string) do
```

        {int, _rest} -> int
        :error -> :error
      end
    end
  end
end
```

```elixir
iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13")
{13, ""}
iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13", discard_rest: true)
13
iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13", discard_rest: false)
{13, ""}
```

#### Refactoring

> To refactor this anti-pattern, as shown next, add a specific function for each return type (for example, `parse_no_rest/1`), no longer delegating this to options passed as arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To refactor this anti-pattern, as shown next, add a specific function for each return type (for example, `parse_discard_rest/1`), no longer delegating this to options passed as arguments.
```

```elixir
defmodule AlternativeInteger do

>   @spec parse(String.t()) :: {integer(), rest :: String.t()} | :error

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  @spec parse(String.t()) :: {integer(), String.t()} | :error
```

  def parse(string) do
    Integer.parse(string)
  end
  
  @spec parse_discard_rest(String.t()) :: integer()
  def parse_discard_rest(string) do

>     String.to_integer(string)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    case Integer.parse(string) do
      {int, _rest} -> int
      :error -> :error
    end
```

  end
end
```

```elixir
iex> AlternativeInteger.parse("13")
{13, ""}

> iex> AlternativeInteger.parse_no_rest("13")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
iex> AlternativeInteger.parse_discard_rest("13")
```
